Galactic BloodShed FAQ Version HTML 1.0 - Part 1

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              Table of Contents

  I. Getting Started
       1. What is GB?
       2. What is HAP?
       3. Where can I get the client and/or server code?
       4. What are the different versions of the server out?
       5. What if I have problems compiling something?
       6. How can I find out more about gb?
       7. Where are the current games running?
       8. Do I need a client to play gb?
       9. How can I start playing a game?
      10. How much time does it take to play gb?
      11. Is there a newsgroup for GB?
 II. The Game Set-Up
       1. What race should I choose?
       2. What's the difference between a normal and a morph?
       3. Which is better, morphs or normals?
       4. What kind of planet should I choose?
       5. What sector preferences should I take?
       6. What happens if I get a rotten home planet?
III. Playing the Game
       1. What is a move seg?
       2. What is an update?
       3. What strategy should I use?
       4. Random Questions I Always Seem to Run Into
            i. How do I change scope?
           ii. How do I talk to others?
          iii. What should I do first?
           iv. How do I interpret the maps?
            v. How do factories work?
           vi. What tax rate should I set?
          vii. What's the difference between military and civilians?
         viii. What should I set my mobilization level at?
           ix. How do planetary guns work?
            x. How do atmosphere processors work?
           xi. What's the quickest way to jump to other systems?
          xii. How do I get hyperdrive on board ships?
         xiii. How do I build ships in space?
          xiv. How come I don't have any resources yet?
           xv. How come my pods didn't explode when they reached their
               destination?
          xvi. How do I get a list of where my crystals are at?
         xvii. How do I get crystals?
        xviii. How do I get a list of ship types I can build?
       5. Final Warnings and Advice

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

  I. -- Getting Started

                       ------------------------------------

       1. What is GB?

          "GB" stands for "Galactic Bloodshed" GB is a game played on a
          network by several users at various sites. The home site, where
          the game and its database reside, is generally referred to as the
          "server." While telnet is one way to connect to a GB game, most if
          not all players prefer to use a more complex program, usually
          called a "client." Not all clients are the same, of course, but
          for now, don't worry about it.

       2. What is HAP?

          "HAP" stands for "Heuristic Astronomy Project." HAP is a close
          relative of GB, but there are many very important differences
          between the two. Rather than go into the differences here, I
          suggest you continue reading through this and then log in to one
          of the games yourself. Ask around and experiment and decide for
          yourself what you like best in a game. Both "flavors" of GB
          (original and extra crispy, if you like) approach the game in a
          different way. For example, in HAP games, communication among
          players who have not met is restricted while on GB, global
          communication is the rule...thus for help, it would be best to try
          a GB game first where players can hear you. As a general rule, HAP
          tries to incorporate many of the best changes from new versions of
          the original code while bowing more to "realism" where possible.

       3. Where can I get the client and/or server code?

          Just follow this link

          Pretty much everything you'll find there is compressed and/or
          shared/tarred, so you'll need to know a little bit about
          manipulating Unix files in order to set things up.

          *** IMPORTANT ***

          When you are transferring a binary file (ie: ends with .Z), you
          MUST set the file transfer mode to binary! If you do not transfer
          the file in binary mode, it will be corrupt. If you experience a
          problem uncompressing/unarchiving a file, this is the problem 99%
          of the time.
          Here's a helpful example:

          Suppose you ftp gb.docs.tar.Z.
          First: uncompress gb.docs.tar.Z (gives you gb.docs.tar)
          Next: tar -xf gb.docs.tar (separates out all the files)
          Then: delete the original tar file to save some space.

          OR: If you ftp gb.docs.shar.Z

          First: uncompress gb.docs.shar.Z (gives you gb.docs.shar)
          Next: /bin/sh gb.docs.shar (separates the files)
          Then: Delete the original shar file to save space.

          Info on these processes can be found in your system's help files,
          but if you continue to have problems, telnet to one of the running
          gb games and ask around for help. This is usually the first best
          thing to try when you have any problems. After all, the players
          have all had to go through the same things you will in order to
          get set up in gb.

          Once the files are in your directory in a conventional format,
          there will be help files and so forth included. It's a good idea
          to print the help docs out and have them handy when you play. When
          you've successfully compiled the client, stripping the executable
          file will reduce your client to a size of around 130 blocks If
          you've got a strict quota on disk use, it's best to do most of
          this work in a temporary directory, then print out the help files
          and transfer the executable into your permanent directory.

          Note that the client successfully compiles only on Unix machines
          or a close derivative of Unix. At this time, no client exists
          which is compatible with VMS. There is also a new version of a PC
          based client for GB available at the scam ftp site as gbpc.zip,
          written by Chris Fodor (aka Feepness). As it develops (ie. as soon
          as Chris sends me a paragraph or two about it), I'll include more
          information in the FAQ.

       4. What are the different versions of the server out?

          Besides GB and HAP, I know about 4 versions of the server
          currently out. Most are versions that take bits and pieces of GB
          and HAP to form another strain of GB. There is currently one
          available on ftp.ipl.rpi.edu on /sigma/gb/gb.IPL-Server.tar.Z
          which fixes some bugs. If anyone has any more detailed information
          about this version please let me know.

          Also, there is a version I am working on, which is currently
          running at the "NYU" games, which is tentatively called GB+. This
          version has TONS of bug fixes, and also new ship database code,
          along with autoscrap, threshloading, minesweepers, and other HAP
          inherited options. Currently there is no ftp site for this, but
          once I get one, it will be posted.

          This version seems to be very stable, as there are over 230
          updates currently in the test game on groucho. Send mail to me
          (deragon@jethro.nyu.edu) if you want information on this version.

       5. What if I have problems compiling something?

          As mentioned earlier, the first thing you should always try is to
          log in to one of the existing games as a guest and start asking
          around. There will often be someone on who can help you with
          simple problems, but if they can't help you, you'll probably be
          referred to Evan Koffler (ekoffler@zephyr.cair.du.edu), who has
          graciously volunteered to deal with _client_ compiling problems,
          but be polite... give him informed questions rather than just
          helplessly whining.

          In other words, don't just write and say "It doesn't compile on
          the NeXT and crashes when I try to boot it." At the least, run the
          code through a debugger of some kind to get a line number within a
          routine or at least get some kind of output sequence. This gives
          the person helping you some reference point from which to track
          the problem down.

          If you're having a problem with a bug in the server code, your
          best bet is to post to alt.games.gb. If the authors want to
          volunteer their addresses (Garrett, Clay, et al.) and/or services
          for direct email correspondence, I'll let them do it. There are
          enough users out here familiar with the code to help you deal with
          whatever problem you're experiencing. What was said in the
          previous paragraph about finding and reporting bugs and receiving
          help also goes here.

       6. How can I find out more about gb?

          Try logging in to one of the current games running. Some games
          have a guest account set up specifically for new users to find
          their way around and ask questions. When it asks for a password,
          simply type "guest" or "guest 0" in most places, and you'll be
          logged in to the game. There's no guarantee that there will be
          someone on who can help you and/or has the time, but during the
          evening is generally the best time to try.

       7. Where are the current games running?

          I used to keep a list of this, but it's just too much of a pain.
          The best way to keep track of which games are running (or about to
          be) is to watch the alt.games.gb newsgroup. It's very low volume,
          so that should be no problem. The FAQ gets out of date too quickly
          and easily in any case.

          Once you get a server address and part, use the following examples
          to connect you to a game with telnet if you're not using a client.
          If you're using a client, simply replace "telnet" with "gbII" or
          whatever you've named the client executable in your directory. on
          Unix: "telnet pooh.caltech.edu 2010" or "telnet 131.215.48.30
          2010" or, on VMS: "telnet pooh.caltech.edu /PORT=2010" etc.

          Note: Some of these games are chronically off-line for one reason
          or another; others are only up at certain (unknown to me)
          scheduled times. Don't be surprised if you get a refused
          connection by more than one game. If you want to enter one or more
          of the games that have not started yet, check alt.games.gb for
          announcements about where to send your requests.

          Other games will be announced in alt.games.gb as they are started,
          including periodic "blitz games" run by various people. A blitz
          game is essentially a gb game in which the updates are squeezed
          down into 5 to 20 minute intervals as opposed to the usual 1 or 2
          per day. If you're wondering what an "update" is, read section 3
          about playing the game.

       8. Do I need a client to play gb?

          If you're going to play seriously, then the answer is yes.
          Theoretically, one could get by using only telnet, but only the
          client will process maps correctly and enable you to encrypt your
          conversations, which is a convenient way to communicate at no cost
          without being overheard on the game.

       9. How can I start playing a game?

          There are two ways to do this. First, you can wait until someone
          announces the beginning of a game. This newsgroup is where you'll
          see such announcements. The person in charge of the new game will
          either include (or point you to) a racegen program which you can
          then use to specify what kind of race you want. Then you log in to
          the game and start playing when it starts! Read on for more
          details on what racegen is and how it works.

          Another way to get into a game is to log onto a currently running
          game and ask. In most big games, there are "sleepers," or races
          which have dropped out for one reason or another (it's not always
          due to weakness, sometimes time constraints are involved). Also,
          many players with big races tend to look for people to help them
          out since playing a big race in gb can be very time consuming.

          Most games now run with the "governor" code, standard since pooh
          version 5.0 and in current versions of HAP. This allows for races
          to have one major leader who can delegate authority over given
          ships and systems to his governors, who are independent players
          recruited by the race leader. This is a great feature for those of
          you out there who want to play gb but lack the immense amount of
          free time that leading a fully active race requires.

          If you see an announcement for a new game starting, but dont want
          to run your own race, your best bet is to post to alt.games.gb
          asking if anyone needs a governor.

      10. How much time does it take to play gb?

          That depends entirely on the number of updates per day. For a
          reasonably large race (say, control of 40 planets) in a game with
          70 star systems or so (3-8 planets per system), it will take you
          at least one hour of playing time per update (this is vastly
          dependent upon how efficient you are...use macros!). This can go
          way up if you are actively waging war with another player. This
          time tends to increase as the game goes on and you grow in power,
          but the main variable in the whole time equation is simply how
          active _you_ want to be. It takes a very active race to come out
          on top in gb; even on a one update per day schedule, it can eat up
          your time, so consider yourself warned.

          Players who join only to play for a little while and then drop
          out, leaving all that they've built to fall into ruin, are
          generally frowned upon. Sometimes it is unavoidable, but all
          deities ask that you plan ahead. Don't get yourself involved in
          more than you can handle. Drop-out players who don't get
          replacements can seriously upset the game balance, ruining the
          game for many other players.

          The advent of team races may offset both of these diadvantages,
          but it's still best to be aware of them.

      11. Is there a newsgroup for GB?

          The newsgroup for Galactic Bloodshed is:

                                     alt.games.gb

          This newsgroup is for the discussion of everything that has
          anything to do with GB, including game announcement, rules
          discussion, game editorials, etc.

                       ------------------------------------

 II. -- The Game Set-Up

                       ------------------------------------

       1. What race should I choose?

          As of this posting, just about every new game that is coming
          on-line is accepting races generated by a program called
          "racegen." You can get a copy of this at any of the ftp sites
          mentioned above, and it compiles pretty easily on most systems.
          Use this program to generate your race and automatically send it
          to the appropriate "deity". Note that you usually have to compile
          a whole new version with the proper destination address (for
          sendmail) in the code, but this is easy...just find the
          destination address line (#TO, I believe) in the code and change
          the address with your editor, then compile.

          NOTE: In some new games, you'll be asked to use your client to
          connect to a special racegen daemon on the eventual gb server
          machine. This greatly simplifies the process of game registration
          since you don't have to have your own copy of racegen, just the
          client. Watch for specifics with new game announcements.

          Other programs, such as "opt_tech," which optimizes your tech
          expenditures (read the docs for more details on how tech works),
          and "psmap," which generates a postscript file containing a map of
          your game universe from a list of stars.

          Here are the helpfiles included with racegen, which should answer
          most of the questions about the program and its use:

          --- Begin included racegen docs ---

          How to get and compile racegen

          First off, get net access. Then you can use the file transfer
          program, ftp, to get racegen from several sites, including
          scam.berkeley.edu. Connect to the remote system, use "anonymous"
          as your name (any password is OK), cd to the src/games/gb
          directory, and get racegen.shar. The whole process should look
          rather like this:

          > ftp scam.berkeley.edu
          Connected to scam.berkeley.edu.
          220 scam.Berkeley.EDU FTP server ready.
          Name (scam.berkeley.edu:leonard): anonymous
          331 Guest login ok, send ident as password.
          Password:
          230-Welcome Guest - access restricted.
          ftp> cd src/games/gb
          200 CWD command okay.
          ftp> get racegen.shar
          200 PORT command okay.
          150 Opening data connection for racegen.shar (60101 bytes).
          226 Transfer complete.
          local: racegen.shar remote: racegen.shar
          62071 bytes received in 6.1 seconds (9.9 Kbytes/s)
          ftp> quit
          221 Goodbye.
          >

          When a game is announced, the host will specify what sort of races
          are desired. If the game will not use the "vanilla" racegen, the
          host will post a file called "game_info.h" that you will then use
          to compile racegen with. Note that racegen.shar comes with a
          default game_info.h file.

          Now you can make an executable racegen. Unshar the archive you
          just got, and make it:

          > sh racegen.shar
          x - racegen.c
          x - racegen.h
          x - game_info.h
          x - Makefile
          x - racegen.README
          > make
          cc -bsd -g -target sun3 -c racegen.c
          cc -o racegen racegen.o -lm
          > ls
          Makefile racegen* racegen.c racegen.o
          game_info.h racegen.README racegen.h racegen.shar

          Now you are ready to go. Just type "racegen", and it will run. If
          it does not, make sure you have the current directory "." as a
          part of your path:

          > printenv PATH
          .:/usr/imports/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/ucb:/bin:/usr/bin
          >

          (Note that the first directory in my path *is* ".". ':' is used to
          separate the directories in this list.)

          If "." is not in your path, you must either put the racegen
          executable file in one of the directories that is in your path, or
          else put "." into your path. The second option is much easier:

          > setenv PATH .:$PATH

          Now you are ready to go!

          The creation of new races is controlled by the person hosting the
          game. Player #1 (the first player enrolled into the game) should
          always be given diety status, as many of the game default
          operations are placed in player #1's control. Other players may be
          designated as having diety status during the enrollment procedure,
          but this isn't recommended (or needed in most cases).

          Race generation is often done using a rather complex point based
          system, the idea being that you must spend a limited number points
          to get better attributes. The program that you do this creation
          process with is called "racegen". There are five types of data
          associated with each race that the player can choose:

          * Name, password, and other profile information -- While none of
          these have any direct effect on game play, they add interest. Name
          and password can be set with racegen before enrolling in the game.
          All of the others can be changed as needed; see also: name,
          personal, profile

          * Home planet type -- A race's home planet can drastically affect
          its game. Jovian home planets are the most costly type, because
          jovians are huge planets with about half the sector area of the
          universe on them. Jovians are the only worlds with gas sectors on
          them; gas tends to be resource-poor but fertile. Class M
          (Earth-type) home planets are the next most useful, with a good
          balance of fertility and resources. Forest and water worlds are
          like class M's and generally more fertile, but they are also
          smaller on average. Desert worlds have high resource content but
          are not very fertile. Iceballs and airless worlds are too small to
          make very good home planets, but they are very common in the
          universe as a whole.

          * Racial type -- There are two main racial types in GB: normal
          races (think of humans, Klingons, Wookies, Pierson's Puppeteers,
          etc) and metamorphs (Alien, the Thing, body snatchers, etc.) The
          primary difference between these two race classes is that only
          metamorphs may have pods and absorbtion as racial attributes.
          Metamorphs are also required to have one sex, which is another
          advantage. A secondary difference that is rather harder to notice
          is that the price of various attribute combinations is slightly
          different for normals and morphs in racegen, especially for some
          of the attributes' extremes.

          * Compats -- The planets found in the GB universe are represented
          as arrays of sectors of various types: ice, land, sea, etc.
          Various races may have varying degrees of compatibility with these
          sector types, which will affect the amount of population they can
          grow on that sector type, and other things too.

          * Attributes -- Attributes are quantizations of a race's
          abilities. Currently there are 11 basic attributes for each race:

          ** Absorbtion -- Only metamorphs may have this attribute, which
          allows them to absorb enemy troops and civilians in combat if the
          morph wins. Combined with pods, it allows metamorphs to replace
          alien population on planets when pods burst.

          ** Adventurism -- This described what percentage of a sector's
          population may move and explore other sectors. High value tend to
          settle planets on their own far more efficiently. If you have a
          low value, you can order movements with the 'move' option.

          ** Birthrate -- This factor determines how rapidly the population
          in the sector will converge to the maximum population supportable
          on the there. High values mean that the population multiplies
          faster.

          ** Fertilize -- This attribute represents the percentage chance
          that a race will increase by one percent the fertility of any
          sector it owns. Any race may take advantage of space plows for a
          similar effect, once it gets to tech level 5.

          ** Fighting Ability - Higher values mean that the race is more
          likely to kill an alien than a lower value. Races with lower
          values will usually need to have larger forces to win in direct
          combat over a high fighting ability. It is important to note that
          this effects only land combat and ship boarding strengths, and not
          ship to ship fighting.

          ** IQ -- The raw growth rate of a race's technology is governed by
          the race's intelligence. The technology increase per update is
          IQ/100. Addi- tional technology gain is available by technology
          investments on the individual planets under the race's control.

          ** Collective IQ; IQ limit -- The intelligence of a race with
          collective IQ is related to the race's total population, as
          follows: IQ = IQ_limit * [ (2/PI) atan(population/50000)]^2.
          [Note: Be careful with this one! If you can't build pods, then
          having a collective IQ could be disastrous as you won't have the
          know how to build *any* kind of useful ships for a looooong time.]

          ** Mass -- Each race has a mass. The heavier the individual, the
          more fuel it will take to launch and land ships full of the race.

          ** Metabolism -- This value controls how industrious the race is.
          Higher metabolism races will produce resources more rapidly than
          lower metabolisms, and also increase the efficiency of sectors
          faster.

          ** Pods -- Pods are small ships, available only to metamorphs but
          at tech level 0, buildable instantly on the surface of planets.
          Each one may carry a single crew-thing; this makes them ideal for
          settling other planets. Pods which enter a system after having
          frozen in deep space will warm and eventually burst, possibly
          leading to spores landing on worlds in the new system. If a spore
          lands on a sector, a ton or more of biomass will be created,
          resulting in a new colony for the podding race. Note that spores
          may never land on alien occupied sectors unless the podding race
          has absorbtion.

          ** Sexes -- Each race has a number of sexes. This represent the
          minimum population that a sector must have in order to be able to
          reproduce. Lower values are preferable to high values for
          colonization efforts. It is not recommended to have more than 3 to
          6 sexes at the outside, unless you are really looking for a
          challenge --- End included racegen docs ---

       2. What's the difference between a normal and a morph?

          A "morph," or "metamorph," is described in the standard docs as
          the type of race you'd see in John Carpenter's "The Thing." The
          major differences between morphs and normals can be summarized
          like this:

             + Morphs can absorb enemy bodies when they attack a sector
             + Morphs can build spore pods on planetary surfaces
             + Morphs' IQ is determined only by their population

          It used to be the case that morphs had a very high metabolism and
          very high fighting strength to go along with all of this, but the
          advent of racegen has changed that considerably. Now, morphs can
          have all of the basic characteristics of normal races -- but the
          three attributes mentioned above are only available to metamorphs.
          The disadvantage that offsets this option is that some items will
          be more expensive in racegen.
          I'll discuss these three items in reverse order: First, morph IQ
          is based on some exponential population formula. In all games,
          this means their iq starts at 0, and the maximum possible morph IQ
          can be set by the player in racegen. A common practice is for
          morphs to spend a great deal of tax money investing in tech to
          offset this disadvantage, but it still takes a while to "take
          off." The low iq means that morphs cannot rely on shuttles (which
          require some minor tech ability to build) to ferry them around to
          colonize planets early in the game. Morphs, however, have the
          ability to build spore pods. These pods require no tech to build
          and are very cheap.
          The major advantage to spore pods is this low cost and the fact
          that they can be built right on the planet's surface (while most
          other ship types require factories which need resources to be
          turned on and time to repair before actually building any ships).
          The drawbacks to pods are that they are slow and that they explode
          upon entering star systems. That's not _always_ a drawback, but
          early in the game, it will mean that several pods must be sent to
          a system in order for you to have a good chance at landing morphs
          on a planet or two. The success rate of spore pods (ie. whether
          they explode harmlessly or result in a colony) varies from game to
          game from 20% to 40%. The other major difference between morphs
          and normals which is mentioned above is morphs' special combat
          ability. If a morph attack force defeats another race in ground
          combat, a large fraction of the defeated enemy will be "absorbed"
          by the attacking morph race, enabling morphs to actually
          _increase_ their population through attacking. Thus, late in the
          game when all planets are covered and well-defended by other
          races, morphs still have a chance to do some serious damage by
          showering an enemy system with pods and perhaps landing enough
          morphs in the system to cause a lot of problems, if not to take
          over a planet or two.

       3. Which is better, morphs or normals?

          This is debatable. Each race type has its own advantages and
          drawbacks. It also depends upon the modifications made for the
          particular game you are in. Generally, each race type can be led
          to success by a good player, and alliances between morphs and
          normals are quite common and can be very effective (since the
          normals generally have the high tech levels while morph's pod
          launching ability and generally high metabolism and/or fighting
          strength can help the alliance).

       4. What kind of planet should I choose?

          This is covered in large part in the above racegen docs, but I can
          make some comments about common questions that arise. Of all types
          of planets, class M's are chosen for homeworlds around 75% of the
          time. This is because they are the largest of any type planet
          except Jovians. Thus, they can support a high population (for
          taxation and tech purposes), and they usually have a fairly high
          number of resources. Another common choice is desert, since it is
          on the same order of size as a class M planet. Deserts have more
          resources, but are less fertile and are rarer in some games than
          class M's (also, you should take 100% desert as a sector
          preference, which means you can't spend as much on the other, more
          common, sector types). Advantages of big planets:

            1. The larger the planet, the faster you will produce resources
               from it once you have covered the planet. The formula for
               resource production goes as (1 - avg efficiency) ^ (number of
               sectors), so the more sectors you have, the better. Races
               that select small home planets tend to get left behind early
               on in the race to build the first ships for this reason.
            2. The planet is much harder to conquer. Even if an enemy
               manages to field a temporarily superior force to your
               planetary population, odds are he won't have the AP's
               necessary to take the whole thing in one update, so you have
               time to marshal reinforcements if you're in a bind.

          Here's a brief summary of the various planet types, to the best of
          my knowledge, along with an estimate of how common these planet
          types are. *NOTE* This will vary from game to game. The relative
          sizes of each of these planets, as well as the benefits (and % of
          races which choose each type of planet, etc.) will also vary from
          game to game. When using racegen, you'll typically pay (or get a
          bonus) for the type of planet you choose to start with, and the
          deity will try his best to see that your points are fairly spent.

             * Class M - 15% - These planets are usually about 60% water,
               20% land, and an even mix of everything else. Once in a
               while, you'll find a class M with an abnormal atmosphere
               (like heavy in methane content).

             * Jovian - 10% - These planets are 100% gaseous, and they are
               usually twice as large as the typical class M planet. They
               tend to be very high in fertility, too, so you can easily
               build up a large population for taxation and tech purposes.
               Also, ships in orbit around Jovians add fuel to their holds
               every update (tankers are twice as efficient at this), so
               even if you're not a Jovian-type race, having one of these
               nearby can be a tremendous asset.

             * Water - 5% - These are largely water planets, and I've found
               that they are generally resource poor. They can be quite
               large, ranging up in size to class M quality, but they are
               usually about 40% smaller.

             * Desert - 5% - These planets are usually 80% desert and 15%
               mtn/ice. They are _very_ nice as far as resource content is
               concerned, and their size range is much like Class M planets.

             * Forest - 5% - These planets are almost entirely covered in
               forest, which is the rarest sector type. Resource content is
               fairly good. Size range is between Water planets and Class
               M's. Fertility is higher than on a normal class M.

             * Iceball - 20% - These planets are generally small (1/5 the
               size of class M's or less), and they consist of around 75%
               ice and 25% mountain. Relative to their size, they are
               resource rich, but the small number of sectors means that
               resources will come more slowly.

             * Airless - 30% - These planets are mostly land (75%) with some
               mountain and ice sectors. The atmosphere is almost always
               hostile, of course, but these planets are probably the most
               resource rich relative to their size (ie. 1/3 the res of a
               typical class M but 1/5 the size).

             * Asteroid - 10% - These are just floating rocks in space, not
               good for a heck of a lot. They don't count as planets in
               victory conditions, and they usually have very few resources,
               and the small number of sectors make it very difficult for
               most asteroids to ever contribute to your cause, though
               having colonies on them have other advantages, such as morale
               bonus. Sector types are random but range among land, desert,
               ice, and mountain.

       5. What sector preferences should I take?

          The most common sector type besides gas is water, but this is
          misleading since there are so many water sectors on Class M's (in
          addition to those on waterball planets). Running a close second is
          land terrain, which is found on just about every planet type.
          Forest is probably the least common, making it an unusual and
          often strategic addition to your list of preferences (remember,
          you pay for both the % compatibility and an overhead cost for each
          of your sector prefs). Mountain is convenient to have since it is
          usually high in resource content and found in small amounts on
          many planets, and ice is also a common choice. I've also noticed
          that taking a combination of desert and a choice of mountain, land
          and/or ice in your sector prefs somehow entices the server into
          making your race a "methane breather" some of the time (or maybe
          it's just bad luck). The problem with this is that most planets
          will be extremely incompatible with your race, meaning your pop
          will grow very slowly and often leave you vulnerable to invasion.
          You'll find yourself at a rather large disadvantage until such
          time as you or an ally can build atmospheric processors (at a
          pretty high tech level, so it takes a while). Some games (with my
          strong approval) are phasing out the possibility of methane
          breathing races except by request. This is not to say that you
          should always choose water, land, and mountain as your sector
          prefs. In many cases, alliances are made based on sector
          incompatibility. In other words, a morph who loves water and
          forest would rather ally with a desert/mountain/land loving normal
          than another water loving normal, so don't be afraid to choose an
          unusual sector type. It may enable you to exploit planets which
          other races wouldn't mind giving away.

       6. What happens if I get a rotten home planet?

          As it says in the help docs, a good home planet or system can
          really make or break your race. In some games, the diety actually
          goes around before the game and manually sets up everyone so that
          they can more or less start off on an equal footing. If this isn't
          happening, though, and you start with a crummy home planet, be
          ready to fight your way out of it. This makes it all the more
          important that you establish yourself throughout both your system
          and the surrounding ones. Look on it as a challenge. :)

                       ------------------------------------

III. -- Playing the Game

                       ------------------------------------

       1. What is a move seg?

          A move seg (or movement segment) is a procedure during which the
          server updates the positions of all ships in the game based on
          their current orders. For example, if you have a ship ordered to
          move toward a particular star, planet, or ship, this process moves
          your ship closer based upon the ship's speed. You'll receive
          messages from the server when you arrive at your destination, at
          which time your ship stops moving. Repairs also occur at move
          segs. This means that everytime there is a move seg, any of your
          ships which are currently trying to repair them- selves,
          regardless of how they incurred damage, will have their damage
          percent reduced by some amount. For more information on how to
          repair ships and so forth, see the help docs on scam.

       2. What is an update?

          An update is a "glorified move seg." Basically, everything that
          happens in a move seg happens here PLUS the following:

             + Production occurs at your colonies
             + Ships attempting hyperspace jumps either jump or charge in
               increments towards a level where they can jump.

          What this translates to is this: The pace of the game depends
          almost entirely on how often these updates occur. There will
          always be a given number of move segs (usually anywhere from 2 to
          6) between updates, but updates are the real pulse of the game.
          Also, you should note that the period right after updates is
          usually when the most frantic action in the game takes place.
          This is important when choosing what game you wish to play in. For
          example, if you live over in Europe and the update schedule is
          such that updates always occur at 4 am for you, you might want to
          pass on the game. If you aren't on at updates, enemies often get
          the chance of jump into your system and start attacking while you
          aren't on to defend yourself. This can have disastrous effects.

       3. What strategy should I use?

          This sounds like a pretty hairy question, but I will try to answer
          this in a limited fashion for beginners. What you're basically
          looking for is some simple-minded strategy that will get you
          through the first 20-30 updates while you're still learning the
          ropes of the game. Try to follow these two basic principles:
          Produce and colonize. Your first and foremost need is to produce
          resources on your home planet so that you can start building
          ships. The fastest way to start producing is to spread out and
          cover your home planet as quickly as possible. This will be the
          sum total of your turns for the first several updates.
          Once you have resources, you get to start building ships. If
          you're a metamorphic race, that means you get to build pods. This
          is something you should do as soon as you get resources. This is
          one of the major advantages to playing a morph...pod-building
          ability. The nice thing about pods is that you don't need
          factories to build them, which means they can be built on the
          ground and launched immediately. Since pods are slow relative to
          most ships, however, it is imperative that you launch them quickly
          so that you have a fighting chance to win the race to all of the
          unoccupied systems.
          If you're a normal race, you should build a factory as soon as
          possible and then modify it so that it can start producing cheap
          shuttles. After you've played a game, you'll realize why it is so
          important to win the race toward unoccupied planets: it is far,
          far easier to take an unoccupied planet than to kick a hostile
          race off of that planet.
          The best advice I've heard yet is that you should be sure to
          understand the commands in the game so you can use them to your
          full advantage! It takes time and experience to learn the game,
          and it will be a rewarding and fun experience if you approach it
          in the right way.

       4. Random Questions I Always Seem to Run Into

            i. How do I change scope?

               That's the cs command. Scope works just like directory trees
               in Unix. If you want to go to the top (Universe) level, you
               type "cs /". To go to a given planet, you'd type "cs
               /starname/planetname". To change scope to one level higher,
               you use "cs ..".

           ii. How do I talk to others?

               There are three basic ways: br <message> - This broadcasts a
               message that will appear on all active player screens except
               those players with a "gag" in place (you can see that in the
               who list). On HAP, if you broadcast, only those players who
               know something about your race will be able to "translate"
               your broadcast or your messages (see send). ann <message> -
               This is the same as broadcast, except that it limits your
               audience to those players in the same stellar scope as you.
               This is a good way to carry on a more sensitive conversation,
               but there's no way to be sure whether you're being overheard.
               send <player> <governor> <message> - This sends a telegram to
               the named player at a cost of 1 AP. There is no cost for
               communicating this way with the game deity. There is also a
               "cr <key> <message>" command available with the gbII client,
               but it is discussed in the client Help just fine.

          iii. What should I do first?

               Once you get into the game and have connected using your
               password (and your governor password, if applicable), type
               "help". Read through all of the concepts listed first and
               then branch out from there. You'll find some topics in the
               main list have no help files listed. The docs always tend to
               suffer from game advances which outpace anyone's ability to
               update them, but they are definitely useful for the basics.

           iv. How do I interpret the maps?

               Well, the stellar system maps and the galaxy map should be
               pretty simple to figure out. Objects on the map which are
               darkened completely are those in which you have people,
               either on ships or planets. Objects which are partially
               darkened are those which you have data for but no people
               present. The planetary map is a grid. When you refer to a
               given sector, be sure to use (column,row) and not vice-versa.
               If your toggle switches (see "help toggle") are set in the
               default way, the highlighted sectors are those with your
               people on them. Any sectors with numbers on them represent
               sectors occupied by other players. Sectors with letters or
               symbols on them imply the presence of a ship with that
               symbol. Also as a part of the map, it lists how many sectors
               on the planet you own, whether any aliens are present on the
               planet, what your population is, the planetary compatibility
               (which depends upon atmosphere and temperature), and a few
               other things that you can look up in the help docs...it
               changes from game to game.

            v. How do factories work?

               Well, first you build one, then you cs to it by typing "cs
               <shipnum>". Next, you use the modify command to get
               everything just the way you want it, from ship type, to crew
               capacity, etc. Once it is the "perfect" design for you, type
               "order <shipnum> on". It will take a few updates for the F's
               damage level to go from 75 down to 0, and you can only build
               ships (with the build command) at F's which are undamaged.
               Once you've turned a factory on, you can't change the basic
               design of the ship, so plan carefully! You can modify the
               ship later at double the cost differential (which is new cost
               - original cost) provided you can fit the necessary resources
               into the cargo bay of your ship. This means that ships with 0
               cargo capacity cannot be modified.

           vi. What tax rate should I set?

               After you've covered the planet and are on the verge of
               building ships, start it off with a few percent. This may
               vary depending on your race, but I think it is a good rule of
               thumb. This small amount will pay for your ships and keep you
               from losing morale. Later on, when you're not so worried
               about increasing your sector efficiences, you can up the tax
               rate (but watch out for insurgencies!). Note that the higher
               the tax rate, the less chance you have to increase in
               efficiency, and the average.

          vii. What's the difference between military and civilians?

               Civilians have a fighting strength equal to your race's
               fight. Military have fighting strength 10 times stronger than
               your civilians. Contrary to what you might think, military
               _cannot_ pilot ships _or_ fire guns...only civilians can do
               that. Thus, if you have 5 guns on your explorer and 2 mil and
               3 crew, you will only be able to fire 3 guns at a time. Also,
               if you have only mil on board a given ship (ie. your only civ
               on board gets killed by a lucky shot from an enemy), you
               cannot order the ship to any destination.

         viii. What should I set my mobilization level at?

               I've found that it's a good idea to mobilize only a few very
               large planets that you may own. The reasoning for this is
               long and involved, but you'll learn through experience that
               mobilizing small planets (as opposed to building weapons
               plants there) only makes them more vulnerable to a metamorph
               invasion force. Mobilizing big planets still leaves you
               vulnerable to a ground assault (your high mob allows enemy
               troops to arm just as easily as you can if they bring their
               own destruct and absorb a few hundred civilians, for
               example), but big planets require a lot of AP's to take and
               require a lower mobilization in order for planetary guns to
               come into effect.

           ix. How do planetary guns work?

               You don't have to load them. These guns will take destruct
               directly from your stockpiles (provided you have some dest
               there). You can actively use them against ships in orbit
               around your planet by using the "defend" command (in the help
               files). These guns will also _automatically_ fire on any
               non-allied ship that tries to land on your planet...even a
               couple of medium caliber planetary guns is better than
               nothing. Also, the ship may not be destroyed, but if it is
               damaged, there is a chance that it will crash land, thwarting
               the attack. You get a certain number of planetary guns
               proportional to how many sectors you own on the planet and
               how high your mob level is.

            x. How do atmosphere processors work?

               To put it simply, it doesn't matter who builds a processor...
               only who currently owns it. A processor will slowly change
               the atmosphere of a planet (rate inversely proportional to
               planet size) to the ideal preferences of the owner of the
               processor at a cost of 3 fuel per update, which must be
               loaded into the processor. The last time I checked,
               processors will continue to eat up 3 fuel per turn if they
               have fuel to burn even after a given planet is perfectly
               atmospherically compatible with the owner, so it's a good
               idea to scrap processors once you reach this goal.

           xi. What's the quickest way to jump to other systems?

               Since you receive jump technology at a tech level of 50, your
               best bet is to have a ship ready to modify once you get
               there. If you're going to build a large fleet of jump ships,
               you'll save a lot of res by just building a factory and
               starting it up AFTER you've been able to design the ship with
               jump included. Some players, though, prefer using a few
               heavily armed explorers or Terraformers (which have large
               hanger and fuel capacity for long jumps) which they modify
               for jumping as soon as they can, saving a few updates by not
               having to wait for a factory to come on line.

          xii. How do I get hyperdrive on board ships?

               In order to get hyperdrive aboard ships such as e's and T's,
               you must first have a given number of resources in the cargo
               bay. The amount depends upon the new cost of the ship with
               hyperdrive minus the old cost (double that to get the cost of
               the upgrade). That means you must be able to fit that many
               resources _on_board_ your ship to make the upgrade. For e's,
               big cargo holds aren't very common, so you might find that
               you have to "bootstrap" your way up by upgrading the size of
               your cargo hold. See the "upgrade" command in the help files
               for more info. In case the help files aren't very
               enlightening, here's an example of how to build a jump
               capable terraformer: > build T 2,2 (let's say this gives you
               T #1456 in sector 2,2)
               > load #1456 r 18
               > cs #1456
               > upgrade hyper (now you've got hyperdrive capability)
               > load #1456 r 16 (assume you want to add a crystal mount)
               > upgrade mount (now when you jump, you'll do it in one
               update,
               and you'll use a _lot_ less fuel, if you've
               got a crystal in the mount, of course)
               > load #1456 x 1 (assuming you have a crystal on the planet)
               > mount #1456 (now you can take advantage of your xtal mount)

               Say I wanted to increase the hanger capacity of my T, here's
               how I would do it:
               > cs #1456
               > load #1456 r 2 (This can cost 2 or 4, depending on your T)
               > upgrade hanger 6 (Default hanger of a T is 5...you must
               also have a high enough tech to build this kind
               of ship)

         xiii. How do I build ships in space?

               Well, the way to do this is get a ship into orbit with the
               resources you need. You can use just about any ship, but a
               shuttle works just fine. You can load it with an infinite
               number of resources, but you just can't land an overloaded
               shuttle...so you _don't_ need ships with huge cargo bays to
               build some of the larger structures like H's, O's, S's, etc.
               You can get resources onto the shuttle by ferrying them up
               from the surface with another ship. Once you have done that,
               change scope to your shuttle, and type "build <shiptype>".
               This will create a new ship docked to your shuttle. You can
               then launch it or do whatever you want with it (but be
               careful about trying to land damaged ships! Some ships are
               built with a certain damage level that must then be
               repaired...others can't land at all).

          xiv. How come I don't have any resources yet?

               Often, races with low metabolisms and/or small homeworlds or
               worse, a combination of the two, will take painfully long to
               start generating any resources. You can help alleviate this
               problem by buying a reasonably high metabolism. I usually
               find that 1.0 gets me off fairly quickly, but if I have the
               points to spend, I'll go higher. High metab isn't so crucial
               for Jovian races since they start with huge homeworlds, so
               this minimum could go down to around 0.85 or so, in my
               opinion.

           xv. How come my pods didn't explode when they reached their
               destination?

               Speaking from personal experience only, pods can explode at
               an update or a move seg. The chance of this happening for
               each pod at each update/segment is around 30%. Thus, if your
               pods arrive at a system, go ahead and set them on course for
               nearby planets. Some might actually get there before
               exploding, giving you a new colony in the early parts of the
               game.

          xvi. How do I get a list of where my crystals are at?

               Once you are at tech 50, you'll be able to see the location
               of all crystal sectors on planets you have explored. At
               times, these sectors will be covered by structures built by
               you or someone else (such as F's, a's, Y's, etc), but you can
               get around that problem by using "toggle geography" and than
               viewing the map.

         xvii. How do I get crystals?

               If you occupy any crystal sectors, you have a chance,
               depending upon that sector's efficiency, to mine a crystal at
               every update. Once you've mined from around 1-6 crystals from
               a given sector over time, it will revert to a "normal"
               sector.

        xviii. How do I get a list of ship types I can build?

               Try "build ?" which is described under "help build." This
               will give you a summary of ship types. If you want detailed
               info on a specific ship, type "build ? x" where x is the
               letter that represents that ship type.

       5. Final Warnings and Advice

          If you see a bug, tell the deity in charge. Period. Many games are
          thrown out of balance by players who find bugs and exploit them.
          If you're really in this to have fun and play the game well, you
          shouldn't need to cheat to win.

          Remember that some types of ships are built with damage that takes
          a few updates to repair. This means that you'll have to plan
          ahead, and, more importantly, don't try to land these or any other
          damaged ships unless you want to risk losing them! You have a
          percentage chance equal to the ship's damage of crash landing and
          possibly destroying your ship!

          Use the "tactical" command often to check for the presence of
          enemy ships which may not show up on your map. Remember, to check
          an entire system for enemies, it might be better to do a "tact g"
          rather than just a "tact." This gives tactical reports for your
          planets only (which is still full coverage most of the time) and
          avoids repetitive tact reports from every single one of your ships
          in system. Also, be careful what orders you give in Universal
          Scope (the top level)...sometimes, asking for tact reports from
          all of your ships (or even just stock reports) can tie up the game
          and waste a lot of everyone's time.

          Remember that some types of ships can't be built in factories,
          most importantly ships such as Stations and Habitats. To build
          something like this, you can overload a shuttle in orbit! Also, be
          sure you know what the rules are for Habitats in your game (ie. do
          they produce extra resources every turn? If so, how many?).

          If you've got "smart guns," learn how to use them and take
          advantage of them! Don't get caught off-line at an update only to
          have everything you hold dear destroyed simply because you didn't
          set up a protection network.

          The beginning of the game is a critical time when you need to get
          your race started off and several updates occur very close
          together in order to get things moving. When you sign up for a
          game, be sure you can make this first update "blitz" or you may
          find yourself hopelessly behind.

                   --------------------------------------
     ********************* I M P O R T A N T ***************************
     Finally, remember that the deity of the game is there to help you.
        If it weren't for him/her, you wouldn't be playing GB at all.
           So don't whine. Be polite. Make constructive comments.
                   It'll be easier for everyone that way.
    ********************* I M P O R T A N T ***************************
                   --------------------------------------

                     *** RELAX. IT IS ONLY A GAME. ***
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
History: Jan 17, 1997 - Converted to HTML - Evan Koffler
Galactic Bloodshed FAQ Version HTML 1.0 - Part 2

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
This posting serves as an appendix to the alt.games.gb FAQ sheet. It has a
series of ten questions asked to several gb veterans by Mike Varney and
their responses. These questions and their responses are designed for novice
players. They don't cover many aspects of the game, but they can be very
helpful. Unlike the first posting of the FAQ, this one is unlikely to change
over time unless I get new submissions for answers to these questions. I am
not exactly looking for new submissions, but...

                              Table of Contents

  I. Setting up your race
       1. Should I choose a metamorphic race or a normal race?
       2. What type of home planet should I choose?
       3. How should I spent my remaining points?
       4. What sector preferences should I choose?
 II. The Beginning of the Game
       1. What should I do before the first update?
       2. What is the first ship I should build? The second?
       3. What can I do to increase my resource production on any given
          planet?
III. Later in the Game
       1. Should I colonize the planets in my own system first, or should I
          focus on arriving in other systems before opponents can?
       2. What should I do when I see another ship other than my own?

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Editorial comment:

   * These answers are not all necessarily right. There may be several
     misleading and some totally wrong answers in here, so take these with a
     grain of salt. These strategies are not foolproof.

   * As you will see from the wide range of answers for each question,
     everyone has their own playing style and their own opinions on how
     newbies should proceed.

   * A balanced view of the game, in light of all the different viewpoints,
     is hopefully presented.

   * The original responses were edited where necessary to make them more
     readable, either by slightly rewording a vague sentence, making the
     format more readable, changing grammar here and there, etc.

In sum...you have been warned.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Legend of Shorthand Used by Respondents

            GB Name         Real Name       GB Name     Real Name
         Feepness       Christopher Fodor NB         ???
         Lestat         Kevin Martin      TheCulture Petri Wessman
         Keskiolut      Toni Kotinurmi    Froos      Jerry Liu
         Neue Regel     Derek Jewhurst    Griffons   Paul Daniels
         Garfel         Jari Koivikko     Pillarian  Scott Donavan
         ???            Rob Nesius        Tao        Jukka Sinisalo
         Thing          David Fernandez   Empire     Samuli Suomi
         Muu            Dan Andersen      ???        Link Baker
         Fnebish Legion Doug Ingram       Greenies   Mitch Ferguson
         Microbians     Jason W. Solinsky Zurgithian Mike Simmonds
         Tribbles       Shire

                       ------------------------------------

  I. -- SETTING UP YOUR RACE

                       ------------------------------------

       1. Should I choose a metamorphic race or a normal race?

          Feepness -
               Normal for me. With high IQ, and try to max out metabolism.

          Lestat -
               Metas are more work because they are able to send pods out
               fairly early in the game. Typically, they will have a large
               number of pods out at most times. Since they need to get
               ahead early, you really have to pay attention to them.

          Keskiolut -
               Whatever, not too specialized race is the main point. If you
               have a specialized race, you MUST know what you're doing.

          Neue Regel -
               Normal

          Garfel -
               I prefer normal 'cause i get lot of tech

          Rob Nesius -
               The concept of a 'normal' race might be more comfortable for
               a newbie. There are a number of pros and cons to consider.
               The normal races, also referred to as 'techies', start out
               with their IQ at a high number. Their tech then increases
               roughly at the rate of IQ/100. Which means it grows at a
               linear rate. Morph's intel- ligence, on the other hand, is
               based on their population. So, before a Morph can increase
               it's tech, it must increase it's population. In consideration
               of this, Morphs have the ability to build 'pods' at zero
               tech, and launch them to other planets, thus letting them
               expand throughout their home systems at a comparable rate to
               the 'techies'. Morph's usually have a higher 'fight' than
               'normals'. It is possible for Morphs and Techies to be
               allies. The game is not 'morphs' against 'techies'.

          Thing -
               If you want to get the higher tech toys first, get a normal
               race with a high int; otherwise, a meta is a better choice.
               They start out slow but can catch up quickly.

          Muu -
               Well, as a newbie, I would start as a normal race. They get a
               technological advantage over the meta's right from the start.
               They are also much more straight forward to play. Meta's can
               get get very complex and very time-consuming in the
               beginning. Also, Normal's tend to attempt to enslave Meta's
               as soon as possible. Therefore, if you are not very
               experienced, you will not be able to keep a Meta as a free
               empire.

          Fnebish Legion -
               Choose metamorphs if you want to concentrate more on ground
               fighting and a more dynamic (and time-consuming) game. Choose
               a normal race if you'd rather experiment with building ship
               types, with the ultimate goal of finding a good metamorphic
               ally to do the "dirty work" for you. Both types of races can
               just as easily win the game, and they're both just as
               difficult to learn how to play well.

          Microbians -
               You can have fun with both types of races. I've always found
               the HAP racegen to favor normal races and the GB racegen to
               favor metamorphs, but the universe will always need a mixture
               of both. In my experience metamorphs have represented a
               considerably greater time consumption than normals, so you
               should take this into account. (of course any race will take
               a long time if you occupy to much of the galaxy). On the GB
               racegen you can create some interesting crosses between
               metamorphs and normals (like races with collective IQ's but
               neither pods nor absorb.) Most of these combinations are
               disastrous, but others (like a collective IQ, no pods Jovian)
               can be both interesting AND playable.

          Tribbles -
               I would suggest a normal race, they tend to have less ship to
               worry about, and a lot less complications. A meso to be
               effective must know about tech investiments, how to maximize
               population, and uses of pods.

          NB -
               If you want to explore all the nifty ship types of the game,
               I would suggest you not be a metamorph. Also, being a
               metamorph successfully requires either tireless fingers or an
               understanding of macros!

          TheCulture -
               Depends on whether you want to side with the "Techs" or the
               "Morphs"... Metamorphs can build pods very early in the game,
               so they get a head start on the normal races, who have to
               wait until they can build a shuttle to get off their home
               world. Morphs have a collective IQ, which means that in the
               beginning their technology level will increase *very* slowly.
               Since your tech level determines what kind of whiz-bang stuff
               you can build, it will take a while until your average Morph
               race gets its first shuttle up in the air. Things even out
               later in the game.

          Froos -
               Depends on your playing strategy. If you enjoy spending a lot
               of time playing with ships and fleets I'd choose normal. If
               you don't want to spend a heck a lot of time and don't mind
               spending your time on planet surfaces, choose morph.

          Griffons -
               It really depends on the game that you are playing.. If you
               are playing in one of the clakson games it is a must. With
               the HAP games you really aught to start out with a tech race.
               Choosing a normal race will allow you to build better ships
               earlier, in general, while the meta races tend to allow you
               to have nice things like higher fighting capability, etc.
               With the clarkson enroling system the meta's are the
               strongest races, you can make a meta with the same
               characteristics as a top line normal cheaper, giving you more
               points to use for increasing your abilities.

          Pillarian -
               This is entirely up to individual tastes, If you are just
               starting then flip a coin.. try that type then next game
               swap.. then perhaps make a decision as to what you will
               play...

          Tao -
               I'd say normal. If for no other reason but because many don't
               like them...

          Empire -
               It depends of which tactics you are going to use: if you want
               to be good in man to man-fight, choose meta (because of
               absorption), if you want fast developing tech from the very
               beginning of the game, choose normal ( with iq like 170..)
               and so on...

          Link Baker -
               I have only played metamorphic races. I like the fact that
               they can send up pods immediately and don't have to wait for
               tech. They are more challenging. You don't have the
               technology of a normal race. Also, you can take a planet
               without having to destroy it (absorb). That takes skill.
               Anyone can bomb someone into the stone age.

          Greenies -
               Normal for the first games, it all makes much more sense.

          Zurgithian -
               Well I almost always go for meta, but I depends on the time
               you have to play or the number of friends you have to help
               play your race. Metas take time (you need macros as well, but
               I have done well spending hours podding before I discovered
               macros), to come in the top 5 of a big game you will need 1-2
               hours per update if you know how to use macros.

       2. What type of home planet should I choose?

          Feepness -
               A high resource, low fertility planet (desert or airless) You
          can always increase fertility later with resources.

          Lestat -
               Consider the sector compatibilities which are easiest for a
          given planet type (they're usually marked with a * by racegen).
          Planet types such as iceballs and airless are more difficult
          because they tend to be smaller and have less resources, making
          your race slower in getting underway. Note - choosing Earth (Class
          M) planets may seem tempting, and it's not a bad idea. However, in
          some universes, there are many Earth inhabiting players. This
          means there will be more competition against your race for these
          planets.
          Keskiolut -
               Pick a planet that is rather large ( desert,forest ) because
          you are not likely to get many planets in your first game...

          Neue Regel -
               Class M / Earth

          Garfel -
               1. Desert 2. Forest 3. Earth (you need too many sector
          preferences to use this planet effectively)
          Rob Nesius -
               This primarily depends on the sector compatibilities you
          choose. Jovian planets (gas giants) are very large, and have the
          ability to fuel up ships (so I hear). Half of the sector space in
          a galaxy is gas. Jovians are few and far between. Their resource
          content is not very rich, but passable. Whether or not Jovian
          races should be allowed to terraform sectors to gas is being
          debated. Class M's are primarily like earth. Don't be fooled, they
          have LOTS of water...usually. If you have water as a compat, class
          M is not a bad choice. Water balls are usually small but not too
          bad for resources. Iceballs are few and far between (I think) but
          also not too bad for resources.

          Thing -
               Picking planets is tough. I like to start on a Class M or
          desert since they are usually large. Large home worlds are good
          because they can be taxed, and a big planet has more res than a
          small one.

          Muu -
               I would go for the generic M-type planet. They aren't the
          most common, but they are really useful. As another option, you
          could go for a desert planet. These are GREAT for resources, but
          are generally very rare. Forest planets are also good, as they
          produce decent amounts of resources and your population will
          explode. As for other planets, such as asteroids, airballs,
          iceballs, and jovians, I would not advise choosing any of these as
          they all have problems associated with them, such as smallness,
          lack of resources, and rarity (for the jovians).

          Fnebish Legion -
               Choose either a Jovian, a desert planet, a Class M, or a
          forest planet. All the other types are too small to start with,
          and you'll find yourself having a hard time producing resources
          since production on a given planet goes as _the_power_ "number of
          sectors owned." Producing resources quickly on your home planet is
          crucial.

          Microbians -
               Personally, I like forest and desert planets. They have very
          good resource concentrations and despite much of the
          documentation, they are often quite large. To a certain extent,
          planet choice is moot because planetary size, and atmosphere have
          a much greater effect on the game than the planet type. Just make
          sure you are compatible with the vast majority of sectors that
          appear on your planet. (One reason I dislike class-Ms is because
          most races don't have enough sector preference diversity to
          colonize greater than 90% of the sectors, and the uncolonized
          sectors stick out like a sore thumb.)

          Tribbles -
               To start out with, use either forest or desert. Higher
          resources, and costs less in racegen; you can thus pick other
          sector pref's. I prefer a forest planet myself.

          NB -
               I tend toward earthlike planets. Jovians are fun too if you
          don't mind being somewhat separated from the mainstream of the
          game.

          TheCulture -
               Again a matter of taste :-) I personally love desert worlds,
          since they have an extremely high resource content (i.e. you can
          build huge amounts of stuff from them). On the down side, desert
          worlds are low on fertility, so your population increses quite
          slowly. The "basic" home world is a "Type M" (Earth-type) planet,
          which is pretty even in all respects -- a pretty good choice for
          your first game. Other choices are the Water world (not that
          great), Iceball (avoid!), the Forest world (low resources, high
          fertility), and the Jovian. Jovians are unique in that they
          automatically make your race a gas-breather (which rules out any
          other sector preferences). This make for a division in the game
          between the Jovians and all the other races, as neither can use
          each other's worlds (although Jovians *can* terraform normal
          worlds into gas ones -- this could be considered a bug). You
          probably shouldn't choose a Jovian for your first game, although
          if you're feeling brave go for it!

          Froos -
               Doesn't really matter too much. Just don't pick an iceball or
          asteroid since those usually are kind of small and puts a
          constraint on your earlier expansion. Don't choose forest worlds,
          either. There aren't too many of those.

          Griffons -
               It really depends on what you want out of your home planet.
          For cheap compatibilites, you should choose a forest. For high
          populations, forest or water then earth. For resources, desert.
          The best way is to fiddle around with the enrol system until you
          have enough points to do what you want. You will find that the
          cost for compatabilities change as your home planets do. This cost
          has eliminated iceballs from being a viable starting planet.

          Pillarian -
               Most choose a class M (All sector types except gas) simply
          because it enables the player to parallel their race against the
          thinking of a modern day situation.

          Tao -
               Maybe earth or forest (if this is asked). Both have fairly
          good fert and resources. Not desert, because fert is so low there.

          Empire -
               In earth-,forest- and joviantype planet your population grows
          faster... In desert-type planet you have relatively greater
          resources... Of iceballs and Airlesses I have no experiences..

          Link Baker -
               Earth type planets. Their size can support a decent
          population (Meso's need population for tech). They have pretty
          good resources.

          Greenies -
               Desert, or Earth. Both are fairly large size planets, have
          plenty of resources, and can be found in just about every system.

          Zurgithian -
               Desert, Earth or Forest (Jovians are good too, but try the
          others first), as a meta you can have 1 guy live on any sector
          type so even if you are on an Earth type with incompatable sectors
          you can still mine resources there.

       3. How should I spend my remaining points?

          Feepness -
               Fiddle around, trying different things every game... that
          makes it fun.

          Lestat -
               Metabolism is important for producing resources at a
          reasonable rate, especially early on; many players recommend at
          least 0.95 or 1.0. Adventurism encourages your people to spread
          out without your help. IQ is useful for developing tech. They're
          all useful, of course... which to emphasize the most is your
          personal preference. Just be sure, in your first few races at
          least, not to cripple any one stat too greatly, or you may regret
          it.

          Keskiolut -
               Metabolism is great, at least 1.0, and fight should never be
          below 3 or 4.

          Rob Nesius -
               IQ will take most of them. Good IQ is about 150-170, 200 if
          you really want to spend the points.

          Garfel -
               Raise iq to at least 180 and metabolism to 0.9. Drop
          adventurism to 0.05, birthrate to 0.6 (or maybe 0.5; it's not
          important to have it high), and get a little fertilize.

          Rob Nesius -
               Metabolism is a good place to put points. This represents how
          active your race is. A race with a low metab(.8 is considered low)
          will build up fuel, and resources(res) at a slower rate than a
          race with a 1.0 metab. You don't absolutely need a high metab.
          Lower metab is still playable, but it requires shrewder planning
          and foresight on the part of the player. Birthrate should be high.
          Adventurism need not be high. It represents the chances of members
          of your race deciding to expand the 'frontier'. For techies, iq is
          usually a good one to boost up. Don't take more than 3-6 sexes
          required to reproduce.

          Thing -
               Always try and get a metab of 1.00 or great. I like to have 1
          sex, since it makes colonizing easier. Concentrate on either a
          smart race or a good fighter type race.

          Muu -
               A high IQ is nice, as this allows your technology level to
          increase more quickly. Sector preferences are also really nice.
          For a normal race, the other stats aren't as important, in my
          opinion. A low mass is useful, and sometimes you can save a lot of
          points by reducing your adventurism to as low as possible. This
          has the effect of having to move all your population manually...
          They will not move on their own.

          Fnebish Legion -
               Get at least three sector preferences, but don't go for the
          "common" choices. It's best to find an unusual mix. You'll work
          much better with potential allies since you won't be wanting the
          same types of sectors. Also, make sure your metab is _at_least_
          1.0 unless you're a Jovian race (in which case 0.9 is a good
          minimum). If you're not going to spend the points on a high iq,
          spend 'em on fight or metabolism. Don't try to max things out too
          much...at high levels of any attribute, then the cost rises much
          more quickly than the attribute, but you want something high to
          give your race a distinct edge, if possible.

          Microbians -
               It's up to you. Generally, its not possible to take over the
          universe on yuor own, so you should make sure that you have
          something to offer potential allies. A perfectly well-rounded
          race, may not have much to contribute

          Tribbles -
               For a first time player, try to only add sector prefs, go
          with the default setting for the most part. They're not great, but
          they're not bad either. I would try to have these sectors pref's:
          Forest, Water, Desert, and land. Also drop your # of sexes to 1.
          It make metabolism a little cheaper.

          NB -
               Fight ability is good, but I tend to think reproduction
          (minimizing number of sexes) is more important.

          TheCulture -
               Hmmm... depends heavily on the type of play you're going to
          foll. If you're a "tech" then you can downplay the "fight" and
          invest in IQ, and vice versa if you're going to go for the "Wood
          Clubs & Brute Strength" -department :-) I personally like
          investing a lot in IQ (tech).

          Froos -
               Make sure you have decent IQ (~150), reasonable birthrate
          (>0.6), good metabolism(1 or so), and try to be compatible with as
          many sectors as you can.

          Griffons -
               Well that really depends. To pull out the maximum res you
          need both a high pop and a high metab (res is required for the
          building of ships). Also Birth is good and so are compatibilities
          to sectors; likewise, someone with fight 10 troops is really nasty
          to come across. The only way to really tell what you need is by
          your playing style. That only comes with experience... Go for a
          basic race that populates well and has 180 tech... it is a good
          start for a beginner.

          Pillarian -
               Again it depends on what race you chose. If metamorph then
          fight would be useful followed by birth, then sectors
          (preferences). You may wish to sacrifice some of the iq tech level
          for other things. If techie, then perhaps higher iq. Fight is not
          highly required but a fight of one is a major loss. With such a
          low fight most techies would be (initially) at the mercy of meso
          pods. Then you can choose between birth and metab.

          Tao -
               I usually drop my fight a little, buy metabolism and then
          just sort of spread the rest evenly (no use taking too much
          fertilizing or adventure though. If you won't be able to play in
          the start, then that advantage might help). Be unisex if you have
          the points.

          Empire -
               Take higher fight,metabolism and iq... IMHO don't waste your
          points to get better fertilization; after the tech-level 5, the
          Space Plows will have the same effect...

          Link Baker -
               Metabolism is very important. After that a meso should go for
          fight. Birthrate is fine at 50 - 60 %. Spend extra points on met
          and fight. Maybe sector compat. also, but it's expensive.

          Greenies -
               Desert, or Earth. Both are fairly large size planets, have
          plenty of resources, and can be found in just about every system.

          Zurgithian -
               Metas need a good fight and metabolism. In a blitz game you
          will need adventurism more than .25 (unless you have a population
          spread macro) otherwise have .1, a very high birth rate is needed
          to take planets quickly (metas like me are greedy, take all those
          sectors, ask Feep :-). If going for a low IQ meta then have some
          (.25) fertility, pods and absorb are a must!!! If playing HAP go
          for metab of 1.8-2.0, in one game I had 6 planets after only 2 and
          a bit updates cos I got some res and fuel after the first update!
          You can afford to be pretty heavy as you will not be using techie
          ships for a while.

       4. What sector preferences should I choose?

          Feepness -
               Definitely water, desert, land, and mountain. When playing a
          "Jovian" race, you really can't go wrong since there is a very
          high percentage of gas giants out there.

          Lestat -
               Always choose the ones which are best for your planet type;
          those are cheapest. I don't recommend buying more than one other
          sector compat, if even that, since the *number* of compatibilities
          you have is a factor in point cost as well.

          Keskiolut -
               Main preference plus one or two another ( take 100%, because
          they're cheap after the first 30% or so... ). So, maybe a desert
          and forest. Or another good choise: desert, land and mountain.

          Neue Regel -
               For a Class M planet, take land, water, and ice. These are
          very common to the other planets too. Forest can also be a good
          choice.

          Garfel -
               with desert: land/mountain; with forest: land/mountain/water;
          with earth: land/water/mount (mount is not important but has high
          resource content).

          Rob Nesius -
               Recommendations for these are plated, land, and water. You
          should have compatibility with these three sectors before you
          choose others. You don't need 90-100% on every secotr type you do
          choose. You can select 50% or lower so you can make use of the few
          odd sectors, or asteroids, forest planets, etc. . . Ice is a good
          one, since it shows up on iceballs and most classM planets on the
          poles.

          Thing -
               Pick as many sector prefs as you can; get them to at least
          25%. The best ones in my opinion are home planet sector, desert,
          mountain, land, forest, water then ice.

          Muu -
               If you don't have a sector preference in a certain sector
          type, you effectively can't live on those sector types. So, if you
          can afford it, buy some compatibility in all, or most of the
          sectors. They don't have to be bought at 100%. 10%-20% should do
          for most of them. Be sure to get one or two sector-types at a high
          compatibility, such as 90%-100%. If you live on a Class M, I would
          suggest land, water, forest, and a little desert. Again, if you
          can, get at least a little in all the sector types.

          Fnebish Legion -
               I mentioned this a little bit before. Land and forest have
          the highest fertility (I'm not mentioning gas since, if you take a
          Jovian race, gas is your only viable option), hence can support
          more population. This is good for races with collective iq.
          Mountain and desert have high resource content but low fertility,
          so they're good for races with high metab. Ice is useful since it
          is found on almost all the planets in at least some small amounts,
          and water is a good choice for a race starting on a class M,
          though it is generally poor in resource content. Select an unusual
          mix and you'll find working with allies much easier.

          Microbians -
               Similarly it's not a good idea to be compatible with every
          kind of sector. MANY alliances are based on sector
          incompatibilities.

          Tribbles -
               See comment to question 3.
          NB -
               Land, forest, and water are my favorites.

          TheCulture -
               100% for your "home" sector type (i.e. water for water worlds
          etc.), and at least 50% on a couple of others. "Land" and
          "Mountain" are pretty good choices, since they are quite common.
          Again, this depends on your play style. You can either invest a
          lot in sec. preferences and be able to utilize pretty much
          anything right at once, or you can invest in tech and build
          Terraformers as soon as possible (with Terraformers you can change
          sector types into your own preferred sector type.

          Froos -
               Try to include either land or mountain because many of the
          asteroid/ iceball type planetary bodies will have one of these two
          sectors on them.

          Griffons -
               Totally dependent on your home planet. The more the better
          but you will find that some sector preferences cost too much due
          to you being on a planet that does not have the sector much. You
          will get the idea if you try having a desert home and water
          compatibility. Water tends to be one of the most common (generally
          supports high pop but low res production). Forest is the same as
          water but supports a higher pop and is very rare (throughout the
          universe, that is). Land, is incredibly common with average pop
          and res production. Ice is common, supports little population but
          high than average res. Gas is only good if you are a Jovian race:
          low pop/sector and low res. Mountain his high res and low pop.
          Desert same as mountain but generally more res.

          Pillarian -
               Depending on what race gen is being employed will depend on
          you avenues of decision. These mainly being that you will require
          100% of the main sector(s) of what ever planet type you have
          chosen. Ie class M land(*) or mountain (^) on the GB enroll
          system. Variances have and will occur in the 2 main race gens
          available.. (GB's { code, and Clay's port driven system).

          Tao -
               I've had quite a good start with starting on earth and being
          able to use water, desert and land. Deserts could be changed to
          mount, maybe. That way you can land on most planets, get
          resourceful sectors (desert) and still can spread well on your
          home planet (water).

          Empire -
               As many as possible so you have wider basement when you start
          to colonize colonizeother planets..... Mountain is resource-rich
          and quite a non- rare sector type, but it costs points. If you
          take gas, you don't need to take any other sector types.. :)

          Link Baker -
               Water is pretty abundant in the universe. Forest is rare.
          Choose water, and then land or mountains. Stay away from rare
          sector types.

          Greenies -
               Besides your planet type sector, definitely choose mountain.
          There are mountains on every planet, and asteroid.

          Zurgithian -
               The primary sector type must be 100% i.e. on Water planets
          have water 100%, forest 100% on Forest planets etc. On Desert
          planets you can usually have desert, mountain or ice as 100%. For
          metas it is good to have some compat with forest as your
          population grows fast because of the high fertility. Always go for
          some on land ! If playing HAP have some mountain as there is lots
          around.

                       ------------------------------------

 II. -- THE BEGINNING OF THE GAME

                       ------------------------------------

       1. What should I do before the first update?

          Feepness -
               Beg for an update. It doesn't make much of a difference to
          unload people from the government center.

          Lestat -
               Unload a few people from your government center to join in
          the first reproductive pass. Be sure to leave at least one in so
          you'll get APs! Spend the APs you have moving a few people around
          diagonally from your starting sector, to encourage widespread
          colonization. Decide if you want a tax rate (lowers efficiency I
          believe) or mobilization (eventu- ally produces destructive
          capacity at the expense of resources). Chat some with other
          players.

          Keskiolut -
               Unload @, spread the ppl to next-to-@-sectors. Because you
          NEED as much ppl as possible and they do _not_ reproduce without
          you spreading them. Even if you have high adventurism this is
          recommended.

          Neue Regel -
               Get your MIN-SEXES to as many sectors as you can. You will be
          limited by both AP's and total population. I tend to unload 4-6
          people from my @ before the 1st update. Load them back in after
          the update though.

          Garfel -
               Unload your @ (load #number c -10). Depending on your number
          of sexes, that number of people to the highest fertility sectors
          so you have a lot of people after the 1st update.

          Rob Nesius -
               Move your people around. It's important to get your planet
          covered as much as possible. Move them around in small groups so
          you use fewer action points. Soon, your people will start making
          resources and fuel. HINT: Use the 'analysis' command to determine
          which sectors are your most resource rich. It's probably not a
          good idea to unload people from the government center. You need
          people there to maintain efficiency, which is a very important
          aspect of secotr stats. The more efficient you are, the faster you
          pump out res. And the more effecient your goverment, well. . .
          think about it.

          Thing -
               On the first update, take enough people out of your @ and
          move them 1 space away from your @. This will help you spread out
          faster, but you will not get as many ap's as fast. After the first
          update, load the @ to full again.

          Muu -
               The most enjoyable thing to do, and sometimes really useful,
          is to meet all the people. Potential allies and enemies always pop
          up. You should also look at your position and determine possible
          routes to nearby stars. That's about all I usually do before the
          update, except for unloading the @. On the very first update, I
          usually unload five(5) crew from the government center. I then
          spread them around to five nearby sectors. After the first update,
          one should always reload the center with crew, as an
          insufficiently manned center does not produce Action Points(AP's),
          which, as you will find out, limits the number of actions you can
          do. AP's are vital in the beginning of the game.

          Fnebish Legion -
               Nothing, unless you want to try unloading your government
          center Raising tax rates and mobilizing should come after about
          the 6th or 7th updates, IMHO. If you will be on at the update so
          that you can reload your center after the first update, go ahead
          and do it. Unloading your center at the beginning, taking 4 crew
          out, is nice because it gives you a head start on your expansion
          at the cost of only a couple of AP's (this is not entirely clear
          to me due to conflicting information, but I'm told that centers
          probably _don't_ produce fewer AP's with less crew inside...still,
          you might as well keep it fully loaded after the first update).

          Microbians -
               If you are playing in a game where you start out with 1200
          people, You probabally want to colonize the four sectors on a
          diagonal from your start sector. (I assume here that all races
          have six sexes or less) If your race has one sex move one person
          into each sector, otherwise move six. This will use your APs most
          efficiently. If you are playing in a game where you start with one
          person, you might want to unload the government center, but never
          unload more than 5 and reload it immediately after the first turn.

          Tribbles -
               Drop the # of civ's in capitol by half. Use extra population
          on the planet. Rember to load up the cap again later. Also, spread
          people over sectors, just put your # of sexes in each sector that
          you have ap for. ample. I have 1 sex, thus I move 1 pop into all
          but one of the surrounding sectors, I then move all but one in
          orig sector into the one empty sector, then I repeat the process
          again until planet is covered. If you have over 40 pop in a sector
          though, move only half. If costs too much ap to move more than 20
          pop.

          NB -
               Not much! Try out commands, read the help extensively, and
          try to communicate via broadcasting with other players. I've never
          tried to unload my @! Hey, maybe I'm not all that far from a
          newbie myself.

          TheCulture -
               Unload the crew of the government center (@), and move people
          to nearby sectors that look promising (high resources and
          compatible sector type). Chat with the other players. Try not to
          think of the million other things you should be doing instead of
          playing this (altogether too addictive) game....

          Froos -
               Spread your people out. I usually unload my @. For a morph,
          dump off about 3 or 4. You only have 5 AP's to start out with, and
          it costs one to move one guy, so dropping off more really doesn't
          help.

          Griffons -
               Unload your @ and spread the pop out, but don't forget to
          load the @ back up after the update

          Pillarian -
               First, unload 5 crew from your capitol (ship number of your
          capitol will be equal to your race number)...eg, "load @ c -5" or
          "load #shipnum c -5". Once you have done this, you spread out the
          5 pop (one at a time as you have only 5 AP's before the first
          update. Make sure you don't move the pop onto imcompatible
          sectors. This is, of course only if you are a one sex race; you
          would have to modify the numbers for how many sexes you have. As
          long as you move a whole "breeding group" you are okay. The good
          point of this: It helps get your pop increasing faster; fert and
          eff on those sectors will already start to increase. Bad: You will
          get half the AP's that update, so I suggest after the first update
          you load your gov center back up. Remember that a capitol or gov
          center will only produce ap in relation to its current level of
          crew (ie. 100% crew gives you 100% ap, etc.). The next thing you
          should do is have a look at the number and distribution of the
          planets in your home system. Next, go to the global scope and have
          a look at where you are in the universe (this is important as your
          position will determine as a whole your further strategy). Other
          things you may consider doing: naming your governor, perhaps
          changing your password, appointing a second governor (more for
          your convenience than anything). I would also (if you are willing
          to, that is) place your email address in your "personal" this
          helps when you "run" into other races. It makes the politics much
          simpler. However in a HAP game this is regarded as a BIG nono.
          Next, I would think about the possible access to a postscript
          printer. If you have access to one, then I strongly suggest that
          you pipe a copy of the stars list to a log file, then generate a
          stars map (the program to do this is available all over the place.
          Then I would just wait.

          Tao -
               Not much that you need to do. Talk to others and ask stupid
          questions... They'll help you. I usually unload people from my
          government center and spread them out.

          Empire -
               Use command: help and if theres still something unclear use
          broadcast and ask it from other players, theres always experienced
          players around. Unload people from your @ so you can start to
          populate more quickly.

          Link Baker -
               View the maps of your home planet, system, and your location
          in the universe. Unload @ and spread the people around. Find out
          how close neighboring systems are, which one's you want to explore
          1st. Unload all but one crew from your @ so you still get some
          AP's. Spread 'em around. Load it back up after the 1st update. You
          should have plenty of pop unless you have a really shitty
          birthrate. Get that planet covered A.S.A.P.

          Greenies -
               Get all but one of your people out of the Gov Center, and do
          spread them around it. Look to see where in the universe you are,
          just for curiosity.

          Zurgithian -
               As a meta with 1 sex you can take 6 sectors on the first
          move, unload 8 crew from the @ and move 5 pop 1 sector in
          different directions. Load up the @ again after the first update.
          No tax yet, but have mobility at 25 or so after the first update.

       2. What is the first ship I should build? The second?

          Feepness -
               If you are impatient and have lots of r, you can build a
          ground telescope and survey your system, otherwise wait and build
          a factory for shuttles.

          Lestat -
               If you are a meso, the first and second ship you should build
          is a pod ;) If you are a normal race, build a factory (F) as soon
          as you can afford it, and teach it to build shuttles (cs #factnum;
          make s). If your res production is going to outstrip your tech,
          use "modify" to make the shuttle lower tech. Put people in the
          factory, turn it on, wait for it to repair. Use the "fact" command
          (if present on the server) to keep an eye on the factories over
          the segs and updates. When it's finished, use "build #" to build #
          of ships while in that factory.

          Keskiolut -
               First to build is F. Modify it to make s's, as cheap and FAST
          as possible, maybe carrying nothing but 1 cargo (for upgrading
          later) and SEX-number of people plus as much fuel as possible.

          Neue Regel -
               Make a factory as soon as you can. Have it produce stripped
          down shuttles so you can get to as many planets as possible.

          Garfel -
               One ground telescope as soon as you get tech 5 and 2 res then
          aim at the nearest planets, then a Factory to build shuttles with
          a modified speed of at least 6.

          Rob Nesius -
               A good choice for a first ship for a techie is a Factory. Use
          the factory to build a shuttle to send out to the other planets in
          the solar system. Also, while your factory is fixing itself,(it
          starts with 75% damage and needs time to repair.) build a ground
          telescope so that you can see what the planets in your system are
          like, and don't send your first shuttle to an incompatible planet.

          Thing -
               The first ship you should build is a factory; do not build
          it, though, until you have enough res to turn it on. Wait until
          you have at least 33 res before building it. You want the shuttle
          to hold only the minimum number of crew, no guns, no destruct, and
          no resources. This will let you pay less per shuttle and spend
          more on speed. If you are a meta, just start building and
          launching pods as soon as you get the res and fuel to do it.

          Muu -
               The very first ship I would build is a telescope. That way,
          you can examine the other planets in your solar system and see
          which ones you should target for colonization first. The second
          should probably be a Factory to build colonization shuttles. These
          should have 5-10 crew and 10 crew if possible. Remember, when you
          construct a ship design on a Factory, you don't have to be at the
          given tech of the ship until you want to build them, which is as
          soon as the Factory comes online (about 3-4 updates after
          activation).

          Fnebish Legion -
               If you're a metamorph, build pods like crazy until you have
          the tech capability to build shuttles with speed 4 or so (you can
          experiment with a factory to find out what tech you need). Other-
          wise, build _nothing_ until you've built your factory and turned
          it on. Don't even build a little telescope. You want that factory
          turned on ASAP, even if you have to set it to building really
          crappy and cheap shuttles. Once you have something built, you can
          always modify it later (when you can afford it)...the important
          thing is getting that F turned on. Once you've spent your res
          doing this (it costs 23 plus twice the cost of the ship design to
          build and then turn on the factory), you can build a telescope to
          survey surrounding planets in your system.

          Microbians -
               Pods for a Meso, shuttles for a normal. A lot depends on your
          strategy, your race, your start planet, and (especially with Ts)
          the rules of the game.

          Tribbles -
               Hmmm.... This is questionable. It really depends on the race.
          For the normal player I would say shuttles and then explorers.
          Though I've designed races to skip shuttle production before.
          Remember shuttles are for in system exploration mostly while
          explorers are for other systems

          NB -
               The first ship is almost invariably a shuttle from which the
          weapons systems and so on have been stripped that can carry your
          minimum number of sexes to another planet in your system for
          colonization. The second? Another one! Later you should build some
          shuttles with a bit of destruct on board, to give you a chance of
          snuffing out unwanted alien colonies at the beginning of their
          existence. Of course, if you're a morph, you'll build pods first.

          TheCulture -
               In GB a "ship" is anything that you build, so in GB terms the
          first ship you should build is (a) a pod, if you're a morph; (b) a
          ground telescope if you're a normal race. With this gadget you can
          view your solar system and get some picture of your position so
          you can send your shuttles to the right places. The second ship
          type you should build is a factory (F). When you have enough tech
          and res, you can order it to produce shuttles (for instance) and
          in a couple of updates, you can start spreading out.

          Froos -
               If you're a morph, pods. :-) If normal, shuttle, then maybe
          explorer.

          Griffons -
               Depends on what you can build pods are good for a meso. a
          shuttle factory for all those who do not have pods.

          Pillarian -
               Again it depends on what race you are.. Meso .. You pod like
          crazy.. if you are a techy then I suggest that you build a
          telescope (gives you something to do more than anything) then save
          up for a factory.. the second for a meso.. (second type not the
          second ship) would be K's (Space plows..) at tech 5 ..

          Tao -
               First ground telescope to see what planets there are in your
          system. Then shuttles...

          Empire -
               Perhaps the Ground Telescope would be best as a firts ship...
          With it you can survey other planets in your star system... Second
          would be a factory to produce shuttles to get colonization to
          start... Dont forget to set your tax to about 5 percent, 'cause
          maintaining of the ships takes money and if you dont have money
          your morale drops...

          Link Baker -
               1st) For a meso, a pod. For a techie, a factory (To build
          shuttles) 2nd) Meso - pod. Techie - whatever you have the tech for
          while you are waiting on the shuttles. Domes help the planet and
          you.

          Greenies -
               A factory, for shuttles. Then a ground telescope, to check
          out your system.

          Zurgithian -
               Find out how many planets there are in your system using the
          explore command and build a pod for each one (only need 1 fuel)
          when you have the res. Send the pod to a planet, land it on a good
          sector (use analysis to find one and scrap the pod, hey presto
          another colony :-) As soon as you have the res and fuel send 5-10
          pods to your 10 nearest stars (send them in waves, 1 update apart)
          you will need 1 fuel per ~8000 distance depending on your race's

          weight.

       3. What can I do to increase my resource production on any given
          planet?

          Feepness -
               Cover every sector.

          Lestat -
               Get a higher metabolism, get more population.

          Keskiolut -
               Build Y's. Nothing much else.

          Neue Regel -
               Build Y's or q's. Y's have an added effect of producing
          plated sectors which make it harder for any ships landed on that
          sector to be hit. q's produce extra toxicity but give more
          resources in the beginning. As your sector efficiency goes up, q's
          become less useful.

          Garfel -
               You could use quarries, but i don't recommend it. They cost
          res to build and make the planet more toxic.

          Rob Nesius -
               You can increase resource production with 'quarries'. Beware,
          you can generate 'toxicity' with quarries, but they will probably
          help you out very much. Also, I belive Domes can be helpful.

          Thing -
               To increase res production, use domes (Y), and start out with
          a good metabolism. Make the domes on sectors that have the most
          res in them; use the analysis command to find out which sector has
          the most res. Also make sure you can live on that type sector.

          Muu -
               Generally, get as much population as possible. Cover your
          homeworld as soon as possible. And build Domes (Y's) on a few
          sectors to get their efficiency up (which affects resource
          production).

          Fnebish Legion -
               First, cover every single sector you are compatible with.
          Next, if you have spare resources, you can build domes to increase
          the efficiency of some sectors, which will increase your overall
          average efficiency, which will, in turn, increase production
          without hurting your planet. I've found that quarries are a real
          waste of time and resources.

          Microbians -
               Well, you are going to have to wait a while before you get
          any significant production. If you are a non-Jovian and you have
          the tech and resources to spare, you might want to consider domes.
          Either way, KEEP THE TAXES LOW.

          Tribbles -
               You can build quarries, though I never do. You can also
          increase your population using K's and build Y's(domes) to
          increase it's effiency. If your real brave you can design your
          race to have a real high metab, like 1.5. Thus you'd never have to
          worry about resources.

          NB -
               Spread your population thoroughly (make sure you're
          compatible with the sectors you put people on however), and build
          domes when you have the available time and resources; domes
          increase efficiency greatly.

          TheCulture -
               Move people to the sectors with the highest resource
          contents, build domes (Y) on the best sectors, and possibly build
          a space plow (K) to increase sector fertility so that more people
          appear there. If the planet has the wrong type of atmosphere or
          temperature you can use atmosphere processors, space mirrors, dust
          canisters and greenhouse gas to good effect.

          Froos -
               You could build quarries, or try to put your guys on high res
          sectors.

          Griffons -
               Increase the average efficency(through doming) or increase
          the pop through space plows etc.

          Pillarian -
               Well the bets way to increase r productio is to increase you
          effeciency. you can o this by Doming sectors.. Beleive me it is
          worht putting r into domes!!!!

          Tao -
               Build domes, quarrys, terraformers, space plows...

          Empire -
               You can build Domes after tech-level 5, they increase your
          sector efficiency on which depends your resource-production....

          Link Baker -
               Get that entire planet covered! After that you'll have to
          increase the efficiencies of the sectors with domes. Other than
          that there's not much else you can do. That's why it's important
          to have metabolism.

          Greenies -
               Wait. Quarries are overrated.

          Zurgithian -
               Cover the whole planet, even sectors you don't like, build
          domes on these sectors as soon as possible so that you can plate
          them. I don't use quarries; they're nasty.

                       ------------------------------------

III. -- LATER IN THE GAME

                       ------------------------------------

       1. Should I colonize the planets in my own system first, or should I
          focus on arriving in other systems before opponents can?

          Feepness -
               Concentrate on other systems, except hit the high fertility
          planets in your system at the same time. An enemy could breed on a
          class M ten times faster than on an iceball.

          Lestat -
               Yes.

          Keskiolut -
               Because you are a beginner, take your own system first.

          Neue Regel -
               Depends on how close the neighboring systems are. I try to go
          for the neighboring systems first and get a shuttle to my own
          planets after I have sent out 2 or 3 s's to the other systems. If
          systems are very close (< 10K) it would probably be better to get
          those first shuttles to your own planets. Don't forget to build a
          telescope and check out your own planets. This can save you a lot
          of time by not having to go to every planet.

          Garfel -
               Both if possible. Colonize only the best planets of your own
          system, like those over 40% compatibility and go fast to the
          nearest systems!

          Rob Nesius -
               Try to colonize your own system first, and estabilsh a good
          population base and fleet. Throughout the beginning, you may talk
          confidentially to other players, or publicly to everyone. If you
          can get a crypt set up with another player, feel free to ask
          questions. Also, God is an experienced player who can give advice,
          but don't run to him before trying to figure it out on your own.
          Otherwise he'd be swamped. It's good to establish friendly
          relations with other players, and even better ones with races who
          are in a position to mess with you. Try to get on peoples' good
          side. Even if you are going to backstab them. :-)

          Thing -
               Do both. Use one ship to colonize the planets in your star.
          Use a telescope to save time by aiming it at the planets and
          seeing if you can live on them. Use your remaining ships to
          colonize the nearest stars to you.

          Muu -
               Generally, get as much population as possible. Cover your
          homeworld as soon as possible. And build Domes(Y's) on a few
          sectors to get their efficiency up(which affects resource
          production).

          Fnebish Legion -
               Use a telescope to check out the planets in your system if
          you have the tech to do it. Colonize those you are compatible
          with, but always send your first dozen or so ships out of system
          so they can get a head start on the race with the other players to
          arrive at and colonize unpopulated systems. If waiting to colonize
          your planets allows some other race to sneak in, odds are it will
          be quite easy for you to kick that player out since you will have
          the resources nearby to build the necessary ships to do it. This
          is a last resort of course, since you should always ally with your
          neighbors if at all possible.

          Microbians -
               Contrary to most of the advice I've been given, I ususally
          colonize my home system first. It costs less in time, and after
          you colonize your home, you can use the same ships to arrive at
          other systems.

          Tribbles -
               BOTH! You start off colonizing your planet until you get
          enough tech to build speed 6-7 shuttles. Then use upgrade (cs into
          ship scope have resources on ship and use "upg speed 7"). When you
          can do this then send some shuttles to other systems. When you can
          build explorers, do so and send them to other systems. An awesome
          race would have the ability to skip shuttles, go to explorers and
          thus explore out space the same time as it colonizes its home
          planets, but it's risky even for experienced players.

          NB -
               Colonize your own system quickly! Arriving in other systems
          early is fine if you can build some speed 9 shuttles to zip to the
          nearest stars, but hyperdrive will arrive before your slower
          shuttles reach places much further than a star or two away. If
          you're a 'morph, of course, you should be firing off pods from the
          very first updates!

          TheCulture -
               I'd say focus on the other systems. The primitive ship types
          (pod, shuttle) move slowly, so you have to be fast if you want to
          make it to the best spots before anyone alse does. You'll always
          have time later to focus on your own system.

          Froos -
               Do your own first. Easier and faster and it'll give you
          additonal supplies to conquer other systems with.

          Griffons -
               The latter, the more territory that you can gain early the
          more that you will not have to fight ovewr later

          Pillarian -
               Again everything is relative.. But my answer would be YES!
          You should colonize your system first. You must at least devote
          your first inter- scope ship to the task.. then work out from
          there.. if you have close neighbours.. and they get to you first..
          and you haven't colonized your system, you could be inviting
          dissaster.

          Tao -
               I'd say it depends on what kind of planets you've got. If you
          have great planets in your own system (the telescope!), send the
          first ones there. Otherwise sort of divide your forces...

          Empire -
               IMHO, colonize your planets first before somebody else do
          it...

          Link Baker -
               Everybody should have their own strategy regarding this.

          Greenies -
               Usually the competition for other systems doesn't happen for
          a while. Definetly go for your own system first.

          Zurgithian -
               Both at the same time, pods are cheap in res so if you have a
          high metabolism you can send out lots and lots. After the first
          10-20 updates you should have podded all the systems within 100000
          dist of you, if you have the time !

       2. What should I do when I see another ship other than my own?

          Feepness -
               Talk first... don't give away too much. If it's named
          something nice like "Friendly" then you can assume it's going to
          be OK. Also, if it is a size 1 shuttle you don't have much to
          worry about in any case, but a size 6 d, you should definitely
          make friends if you aren't going to be able to destroy it
          immediately. Put yourself in the other peson's place (he is just
          trying to colonize and will be pretty pissed if you blow away his
          ship for no reason other than he exists.) Also keep in mind that
          this person is probably very near you as well. A close-in fight
          like that can be disastrous in a game.

          Lestat -
               Find out who owns it, try to communicate with that player if
          you wish. If you're aggressive or foolish, attack it. If it's a
          colonizing pod, blow it away. This is all more a matter of
          personal style than learning the rules.

          Keskiolut -
               Talk, negotiate. Do not shoot first, you'll be losing most
          probably.

          Neue Regel -
               Don't try and destroy them right off. That person could be
          your best ally later on. If you see another ship early in the
          game, it means that someone else is close by. If you start into a
          war right away, you will have a really hard time building up at
          all. The other players who are not fighting right away have more
          time to expand to other systems.

          Garfel -
               Try to negotiate armistice if he is in a high place in power
          list, or if you have good allies near then splat that bastard.

          Rob Nesius -
               When this first happened to me, I pannicked somewhat. After I
          calmed my self down and thought it out, Irealized that the ships
          were not a major threat, and that they couldn't know I was here,
          so it's not a personal attack on me the player. Open up a
          dialogue. If there is a planet you can't use but they can, let
          them in exchange for permission to colonize in their own system.
          YOU CAN'T WIN GALACTIC BLOODSHED ON YOUR OWN. FIND OUT ABOUT
          'ALLIANCES' AND BLOCKS. THESE ARE WHAT CAN BE DECIDING FACTORS IN
          WINNING THE GAME.

          Thing -
               If you see another ship that is not yours, send a telegram to
          the ship's owner. If he is hostile, capture it. If it is in your
          home system, capture it no matter what.

          Muu -
               That really depends on you. If you want a war, then by all
          means, do what you will. However, it can be REALLY profitable to
          team up with a Meta, if you are a norm. They generally produce
          more rapidly, and make great troops. Be careful, though, they are
          not as easy to supress as some might lead you to beleive. Thinking
          of him as "my Meta" might just get you into a nasty little fight.
          Again, its really up to you and the situation.

          Fnebish Legion -
               Try to find out what player number owns it by using "tact."
          If it is your own pod and you see the other ship on a map, tact
          won't work, but there is a trick for seeing who owns other ships
          which appear on your map but are too far away for a tactical
          command to work on them: Use the "highlight" command to run
          through the list of players, generating a new map for each new
          highlighted player. As soon as the other ship lights up, you'll be
          able to see who owns it. It's best to talk to that person since
          he's probably a neighbor. If you want peace, don't start by making
          demands or claims of "I was here first." That gets you nowhere. Of
          course, as a general rule, I only let the _most_ trusted allies
          colonize my home systems. Players should understand that being
          allowed to place a colony in another's home system is probably a
          pretty big act of trust. A lot of full-scale and crippling wars
          have been fought simply because one player refused to leave
          another's home system. Deal with this as you see fit.

          Microbians -
               Diplomacy. Declare neutrality if you have the APs and start
          talking to the owner. Look for an alliance and try to ascertain
          the enemy's experence. Oh, and one other thing. I've done
          EXTREMELY well in my first two games and the secret to my success
          has been (with the exception the diety of course) NEVER EVER,
          UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES, LET ON THAT YOU ARE A NEWBIE!!!!

          Tribbles -
               Talk first, shoot later. Besides, the first ship you see will
          most likely be in a place where you can't do much any way. Allies
          can be more powerful than enemies. *grin* Think about it.

          NB -
               If it's in your own system, or one just adjacent to it, don't
          shoot right away (unless it's a missile - ALWAYS shoot missiles,
          and be sure to give their owners a hard time about it in the
          future!) Try to communicate with the owner. If you're seeing them
          relatively early in the game, then they're probably a neighbor,
          and you need to negotiate with neighbors to avoid
          counterproductive wars. You may have a planet useless to you that
          would be useful to them - and vice versa. When pods burst in your
          system, talk to the owners *quick.* If they don't respond, snuff
          out the one - man invasion that results on whichever planet it
          showed up, and do it quickly, because 'morphs reproduce like,
          well, 'morphs. Bunnies can't hold a candle.

          TheCulture -
               If it's a pod it might be a good idea to shoot it down (at
          least if its in your home system), otherwise talking is a *very*
          good idea. Making too many enemies too fast in the game can lead
          to your home planet being turned into a nuclear test site :-)

          Froos -
               This really depends on the individual context. Try to talk to
          the owner, perhaps.

          Griffons -
               Close to find out who owns it and then try to parley with
          them. Successful parleying can allow you to have a good
          relationship or give you time so that you can backstab later.

          Pillarian -
               Find out who it belongs to (ie tact)! Then the best idea is
          to talk to the owner (ie email to him) or send him a telegram,
          etc., then decide between you two what you are going to do. Then
          progress from there.. However you have to remember that generating
          a fair trust level in this game is difficult.. if you mess up
          explain the mess up.. else you could inviyte war at the drop of a
          hat.. this could be good.. but then again :)

          Tao -
               Send him a message and say Hi!

          Empire -
               Try always negotiate first, you need allys to be good in this
          game... And GOOD LUCK! ..we may meet sometime...

          Link Baker -
               Do a 'tactical' on it to see what it is, who owns it, etc . .
          . If it's an enemy and you have an armed ship around, blast it
          (fire command). If you are close enough board the ship and capture
          it (Assault command). Any alien ship in your system is a threat.
          You might want to telegram the person and find out what his
          intentions are before taking action. A pod is trouble; it means a
          meso is looking to colonize.

          Greenies -
               Send a message offering them one of the planets you don't
          use, or tell them that you live there already.

          Zurgithian -
               As a meta there is not much you can do, arm up some military
          on each planet so that they can not kick you off (high fight is
          important). I usually go the diplomatic route send them some
          telegrams, you will need a techie ally and they will probably want
          a meta friend as well. Always check the tactical report in your
          home star !

          ---------------------------------------------------------
                Comments, flames, and questions are welcome.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
History: Jan 27, 1997 - Converted to HTML - Evan Koffler

